Hello.
NOTE CONF
Oh, good.
The microphone is working, I hope.
NOTE CONF
Is it working?
Sounds like it's working.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
Hello.
NOTE CONF
I have returned.
You've had a whole cycle.
NOTE CONF
So you get me again?
Um.
NOTE CONF
For better or for worse.
So.
NOTE CONF
Yes, we are back.
Here it is week five.
NOTE CONF
We are halfway through.
We have the attendance poll, which I think is that
NOTE CONF
one.
And we have the questions from today, which I think
NOTE CONF
is that one.
So do make sure you've done both and not just
NOTE CONF
one or the other.
Um, yes.
NOTE CONF
So it is week five of Ila.
Hopefully you have settled into it somewhat.
NOTE CONF
I notice less people are coming, which sounds about right.
Um, hopefully more of you are watching online.
NOTE CONF
Um, but yes.
So there's nothing really happening.
NOTE CONF
This it's kind of just same old, same old this
week.
NOTE CONF
It's a bit quiet.
There's one announcement I'm going to make at the end
NOTE CONF
of the lecture, but that is kind of it.
So we don't actually have all that many announcements today.
NOTE CONF
I'm about to take away the attendance thing.
So if you've not done your attendance I'm going to
NOTE CONF
give you another like 10s and then I'm moving on.
Um, cool.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this week we are doing eigenvalues and eigenvectors, which
NOTE CONF
are very important.
Actually they are one of those Method things that you
NOTE CONF
do everywhere in maths.
So we're back to doing computational stuff.
NOTE CONF
It's not overly theoretical this week.
It's a lot of computations.
NOTE CONF
Um, so to get us started, a little bit of
a revision.
NOTE CONF
Um, which of these are linear transformations.
So some revision from week three I think week two,
NOTE CONF
week three, um, which are the following geometrically all linear
transformations.
NOTE CONF
I'll give you a minute.
Have a chat, have a vote, and then we'll discuss
NOTE CONF
these all a bit more.
Yeah, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Hmm.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's have another 20s.
What are we thinking?
NOTE CONF
10s.
Maybe.
NOTE CONF
Five.
Four.
NOTE CONF
Three.
Two.
NOTE CONF
One.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's have a look at what we've got.
Um, actually, I clicked the wrong thing off there, didn't
NOTE CONF
I?
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We seem overwhelmingly happy that a reflection and a rotation
NOTE CONF
around the origin are both linear transformations.
What are the comments matrix?
NOTE CONF
Leave your comment to explain your choice.
Um, yes.
NOTE CONF
Good, good.
Um.
NOTE CONF
And only if it's about the origin.
Perfect.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It's only for.
NOTE CONF
Why is it only for about the origin?
What's very important about the origin and a linear transformation?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
NOTE CONF
Cardinal rule of linear transformations.
The origin is a fixed point.
NOTE CONF
It's got to be mapped to itself.
Okay, so we're happy with those two.
NOTE CONF
We seem we seem also relatively happy that a translation
is not a linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
Why is the translation not a linear transformation?
You learned about it at school when you're doing all
NOTE CONF
your geometric transformations.
So in hand.
NOTE CONF
Conditions which yeah.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Which one does it break?
Was white because it was too white.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, exactly.
You you.
NOTE CONF
It actually breaks both of them.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Translations are very bad.
They don't fix the origin.
NOTE CONF
They don't.
They're not linear with respect to addition.
NOTE CONF
They're not linear with respect to multiplication.
So yes.
NOTE CONF
Not a translation.
Good okay.
NOTE CONF
Then we seem to have the two kind of.
We seem fairly happy that stretching the y component by
NOTE CONF
a factor of four is.
Does anyone want to explain that to me?
NOTE CONF
Oh, we fit the middle of term and everyone's tight.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Hello?
Orange jumper.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So you could, you could, you can fix the, the,
NOTE CONF
um as a matrix, for example, in two dimensions is
1004, where you're scaling the x component of any vector
NOTE CONF
you put in by one and the y component by
four.
NOTE CONF
So the y component is changing, but the x component
is not.
NOTE CONF
Um good.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Hello.
Person who said hi.
NOTE CONF
So the only one we seem to be slightly conflicted
about is mapping every point to the origin.
NOTE CONF
Uh, multiplied by zero is our comment, which is a
good comment.
NOTE CONF
Um, what do we think?
Let's let's have another.
NOTE CONF
Does anyone want to kind of either argue to for
or against everything being mapped to zero being.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It's not linear because it's not linear in multiplication.
NOTE CONF
Two times two of X is not intended to x.
Oh okay.
NOTE CONF
That's a very good argument.
Not the way you were meaning it to be, but.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Anyone else got anything?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So it can be represented by the matrix of zeros.
Perfect.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Actually, turns out that one also is a linear transformation.
You just have a big matrix full of zeros.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So four out of my five were linear transformations.
NOTE CONF
Uh, hooray!
We got that right.
NOTE CONF
What are we doing?
Yay!
NOTE CONF
We were right.
Um.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
So let's just think about these geometrically.
NOTE CONF
Then let's just draw some pictures, because it's always good
to draw pictures.
NOTE CONF
Um, and hopefully this will work and you'll be able
to see everything.
NOTE CONF
So let us consider the first one.
If we're reflecting in the x axis, what's going to
NOTE CONF
happen to that point there.
Where is that going to get reflected to itself?
NOTE CONF
Yeah, it's not moving.
Okay, that's a bit boring.
NOTE CONF
What about this point?
Where is that going to get mapped to?
NOTE CONF
Down, down.
Are we all happy with down okay, good.
NOTE CONF
Where's that new point getting mapped to.
Oh yeah okay we'll take that.
NOTE CONF
So those two just kind of swap um that point
stays the same.
NOTE CONF
Are there any other points that may be a kind
of generally interesting that I should draw my little diagram.
NOTE CONF
The origin.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What's happening to my origin.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So it's the same.
NOTE CONF
Has to stay the same.
It's a linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
Important one.
NOTE CONF
But yeah okay.
So we have um what happens to the x axis
NOTE CONF
generally this whole line.
Where does that get mapped to itself.
NOTE CONF
Yeah it's not moving.
So we have a fixed line.
NOTE CONF
It's not moving.
It's completely fixed.
NOTE CONF
Can anyone see another line that might be fixed?
Yet as well.
NOTE CONF
Why?
Because it's.
NOTE CONF
Kind of just being.
Identically.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So actually if we if we consider that line there,
NOTE CONF
we know that point is getting mapped to that point.
So actually this whole vector is just getting mapped to
NOTE CONF
that whole vector.
But that preserves the whole line.
NOTE CONF
So we have another fixed line.
The line's fixed but the points aren't fixed on the
NOTE CONF
line.
So on the red line every point is fixed and
NOTE CONF
not moving and is mapped to itself identically on a
kind of vertical line on the y axis.
NOTE CONF
The line's fixed, but it's not happening in the same
pointwise way.
NOTE CONF
What actually is v?
So if we call this one v, what's v getting
NOTE CONF
mapped to minus v.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So in blue we have whatever our matrix is is
getting mapped to minus three.
NOTE CONF
Whereas here, if I call that one x because it's
the x axis that's getting mapped to itself.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Everybody happy so far?
NOTE CONF
Good.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What about if we stretch the y component by a
factor of four.
NOTE CONF
What happens there.
Let's let's do the same game.
NOTE CONF
What happens to my origin.
Fixed.
NOTE CONF
Good.
What happens to a point on the x axis stays
NOTE CONF
the same.
Why does it stay the same?
NOTE CONF
Yeah okay.
So again this picture is looking remarkably similar to the
NOTE CONF
first one.
Let's consider this point here then.
NOTE CONF
Where does that get mapped to.
Up.
NOTE CONF
Yeah I've, I realised I've fairly steeply made a bit
of a mistake.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to actually take it to be that point
and we're mapping that one up.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise I'm off the sheet of paper.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're now mapping that one up.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's think about fixed lines.
Again.
NOTE CONF
This looks fairly similar to this picture but a bit
different.
NOTE CONF
Can anyone give me a fixed line whereas another fixed
line the x axis.
NOTE CONF
Yet we've seen nothing happens on the x axis.
That's a fixed line.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Um, and actually it's just like we had before.
NOTE CONF
It's fixed.
Absolutely.
NOTE CONF
Point wise.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Anybody else think of another fixed line?
Uh, yes.
NOTE CONF
Parallel to the y axis.
Any line is parallel to the y axis.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Why.
NOTE CONF
Get maximum four times their y value.
So they would stay on the line.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
So anything here is going to again going to have
this fixed line.
NOTE CONF
And what's the kind of matrix equation that I can
write in this case as opposed to this case.
NOTE CONF
Feel free to yell it out.
It'd.
NOTE CONF
Be good for.
You.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Perfect.
NOTE CONF
So we're just stretching.
Well, technically, actually, that's if that's a V, but but
NOTE CONF
but.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Are we generally happy so far?
So actually looking at the fixed points tells us quite
NOTE CONF
a lot about the geometry.
We don't actually have to know what the, um, transformation
NOTE CONF
is if we can just kind of look at the
fixed points, and that's helping us.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What about a rotation by pi by two around the
NOTE CONF
origin.
Whereas let's do the origin again.
NOTE CONF
Where's that going.
It's.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Where's my point to my x axis going.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
It's going round to the y axis.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And where's my general point x going.
I've got various hand movements, which is quite fun.
NOTE CONF
I think we're all kind of suggesting something like that,
but, but, but round as opposed to a flipping, um,
NOTE CONF
good.
Okay, so what's fixed?
NOTE CONF
Is there anything fixed here?
Do we have a fixed line?
NOTE CONF
Do we have a fixed point?
The origin?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Anything else?
NOTE CONF
Nope.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So there's no fixed line.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's quite interesting.
We've now got nothing fixed.
NOTE CONF
Um, but but there's still some kind of structure being
preserved.
NOTE CONF
We're going to come back to that a bit later.
Um, so let's just look at the last one.
NOTE CONF
Everything mapping to the origin.
Where does the origin go?
NOTE CONF
To the.
Origin.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully you're not bored of me saying that.
I know you might remember it.
NOTE CONF
Um, what about my point here?
Where does that go?
NOTE CONF
The origin?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
What about my point here?
Where does that go?
NOTE CONF
The origin?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Everything's going to be origin.
Is there anything fixed other than the origin?
NOTE CONF
No, because we're just all going to the origin.
So there's, like, nothing here.
NOTE CONF
No fixed line at all.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So actually and they feel something slightly different about these
two than these two.
NOTE CONF
There's a kind of these feel a lot more restricted
in what they're doing to our plane than these two.
NOTE CONF
These are kind of changing a lot more.
So actually knowing about what's fixed and what's not fixed
NOTE CONF
tells us quite a lot about the geometry.
And we're going to kind of explore a lot of
NOTE CONF
that today and tomorrow.
So we've written out these equations here.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we can do that more generally if we
have a matrix times a non-trivial vector, we need this
NOTE CONF
to be non-trivial.
It's very important because if it's trivial, why is it
NOTE CONF
important?
If it's trivial, what do we know happens?
NOTE CONF
It goes to the origin.
It always goes to the origin.
NOTE CONF
We're bored of the origin being mapped to the origin.
It's a fact.
NOTE CONF
We know.
It's a very boring fact.
NOTE CONF
That's very important.
But I've now got you to say I think about
NOTE CONF
six times, so it's a bit boring.
We're not interested.
NOTE CONF
That's not telling us anything we didn't already know.
Um, what we want is vectors, the kind of preserve
NOTE CONF
lines.
And if I've got a vector and I'm observing the
NOTE CONF
line, then I can scale it.
But I'm not changing the vector so I can multiply
NOTE CONF
it.
That's what we saw in the kind of blue cases.
NOTE CONF
Um, and that's telling us something about fixing fixing a
line.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So then we have special words for these.
NOTE CONF
This is known as an eigenvector, the vector x provided
it's non-trivial.
NOTE CONF
That's very important.
And this lambda this number is known as an eigenvalue.
NOTE CONF
Cool has anyone.
How many people seen eigenvalues and eigenvectors before this thing?
NOTE CONF
Some of you okay.
So it's not entirely new.
NOTE CONF
Um, slight history lesson just because it's quite cool.
David Hilbert coined the phrase eigen.
NOTE CONF
People were kind of studying these things with these properties
beforehand, but he called them Eigen.
NOTE CONF
He was German.
Eigen means own in German, so it's like the matrix's
NOTE CONF
own a vector and own a value, which kind of
makes sense.
NOTE CONF
It's quite defining of the matrix transformation.
Um, side note about David Hilbert.
NOTE CONF
He you might have heard of.
Have you heard of the Millennium Maths Prize problems?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So they kind of they were loads of problems, uh,
NOTE CONF
set out in the year 2000.
And if you solve one of them, you get $1
NOTE CONF
million.
Only one has been solved.
NOTE CONF
Go forth and solve them.
They're hard.
NOTE CONF
Don't try it tomorrow.
You probably won't manage it.
NOTE CONF
I'll be impressed if you do.
Um.
NOTE CONF
And demand that I can come to the party.
Anyway, um, he they were inspired by the Hilbert problems,
NOTE CONF
which he did a similar thing in actually 1902.
And actually, if you look at how the maths research
NOTE CONF
we did in the 1900s, about 80% of it could
be tracked back to one of Hilbert's problems.
NOTE CONF
So he essentially just wrote a list of things he
wanted to know, and mathematics did what he wanted to
NOTE CONF
know.
Um, I don't quite know how he got that power,
NOTE CONF
but he did.
Um, so there we go.
NOTE CONF
Hilbert.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to now show a little Mona Lisa picture,
because that's fun.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Here is my friend Mona Lisa.
Um, and I've got a little matrix, and I've transformed
NOTE CONF
a picture into some less pretty picture of the Mona
Lisa.
NOTE CONF
Um, and actually, I can keep going.
I could change my matrix And we keep distorting this
NOTE CONF
picture.
Does anything anybody notice anything that's not changing with this
NOTE CONF
picture, though?
The origin.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
I wasn't expecting that answer, but yes, the origin is
NOTE CONF
not changing.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Uh, what else isn't changing?
What else is kind of staying the same?
NOTE CONF
The lines?
Yeah, the edges of the picture.
NOTE CONF
We're keeping the edges of the picture.
I mean, it's being very distorted.
NOTE CONF
But.
Her nose is still between her eyes.
NOTE CONF
Um, somewhat.
Um, so this is what a linear transformation is.
NOTE CONF
It's distorting stuff.
But the fundamental thing we have still retains its kind
NOTE CONF
of basic properties.
So a picture is still going to kind of look
NOTE CONF
like the picture.
That was a good bit of timing.
NOTE CONF
Um, for the most of the case.
Pardon Was.
NOTE CONF
That a.
Nope.
NOTE CONF
Um.
And that's.
NOTE CONF
So actually we can find out quite a lot.
Now I have to pause this at exactly the right
NOTE CONF
time, and I just missed it.
Uh, something does happen a bit.
NOTE CONF
Oh, I missed it.
We'll have to wait for the next one.
NOTE CONF
Uh, let's see if I can do it this time.
Oh, nearly.
NOTE CONF
What happens at that point?
She disappears.
NOTE CONF
How have we got rid of the Mona Lisa?
I have stolen the Mona Lisa.
NOTE CONF
This is not good.
Um.
NOTE CONF
What's happened there?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
The determinant of our matrix is zero.
Quite clearly.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully, we all notice our matrix is determined.
And if we think about our two lines, what's happened
NOTE CONF
to our two lines?
They became one line.
NOTE CONF
So our two lines started overlapping.
Um, so that's a kind of degenerative Case that we
NOTE CONF
should have in the back of our mind.
Okay, so I've talked for a long time now.
NOTE CONF
We have the definition of an eigenvector and an eigenvalue.
So let us think of some of some questions.
NOTE CONF
Um, if I have given you the identity matrix what
are the eigenvalues.
NOTE CONF
Um so I will that question is up on.
Thingy.
NOTE CONF
Have a moment to think about it.
Actually, maybe it's more useful for you to see the
NOTE CONF
definition.
Let's keep the definition up.
NOTE CONF
Um, what is, uh.
So.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Have a moment.
NOTE CONF
Talk to a friend.
If I give you the identity matrix, what are the
NOTE CONF
eigenvalues?
Of the Vectors.
NOTE CONF
Eigen vectors even.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I'm going to give you another 30s.
NOTE CONF
Let's say.
I feel like everyone's really sleepy today.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Another 20s.
NOTE CONF
Get your votes in.
10s.
NOTE CONF
Five.
Four.
NOTE CONF
Three.
Two one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What we have, we have that.
NOTE CONF
So we have all of our when all of our
when except the origin.
NOTE CONF
None of our when all of our when except the
axes and none of the above.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Why?
We see.
NOTE CONF
We seem quite divided.
There doesn't seem to be a really clear winner.
NOTE CONF
Lots of people saying all of our.
And why are we thinking all of our when.
NOTE CONF
It's the identity.
Yeah, exactly.
NOTE CONF
It's every matrix gets into itself.
Why all of our own except the origin?
NOTE CONF
We've just spent a long time saying the origins fixed.
Why is not the origin?
NOTE CONF
Pardon?
It's supposed to be non-trivial.
NOTE CONF
Okay, that's a good point.
Um.
NOTE CONF
What about everything apart from the axes?
Why not the axes?
NOTE CONF
And you all want to justify that one?
No.
NOTE CONF
I mean, they're getting mapped to themselves.
Um, none of the above.
NOTE CONF
Hmm.
Okay, let us have another 10s to talk to your
NOTE CONF
neighbour, and then another 10s to vote again and we
will see what we think.
NOTE CONF
Is.
Good.
NOTE CONF
You just have ten more seconds.
Some taxes.
NOTE CONF
Five four.
Not many people have voted.
NOTE CONF
Actually, I might give you another five seconds to vote.
See if we can get numbers up over.
NOTE CONF
Let's see if we can get over halfway.
Can we get to 110 race?
NOTE CONF
Who's going to be the 100?
Well, let's do 113.
NOTE CONF
That's halfway 114.
111.
NOTE CONF
I need three more people.
Two.
NOTE CONF
One.
One more person who's going to be the last person.
NOTE CONF
Yay!
We made it.
NOTE CONF
Okay, good.
What do we say?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now we now we seem to have flipped fortunes.
NOTE CONF
We seem to be quite happy that it's all of
our win and all of our when except the origin,
NOTE CONF
but we still seem a bit split.
We're not, we're not.
NOTE CONF
We've only got one answer here.
So let's let's come back to the definition and think
NOTE CONF
about what's going on.
So actually let's look at the actual definition in the
NOTE CONF
book.
Where's that.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
So, uh, we have an n by n matrix.
NOTE CONF
We have a scalar number lambda, which is the eigenvalue.
If this equation holds for some column that doesn't equal
NOTE CONF
zero in n we'll call x a vector rather than
a column.
NOTE CONF
Um but yeah we want x to be nontrivial.
We want it to be not the origin because we
NOTE CONF
always know what the origin does.
It's boring.
NOTE CONF
The origin goes to the origin.
That's what happens.
NOTE CONF
We know that.
So we're not actually very interested in the origin because
NOTE CONF
we know what happens to it.
So actually in the eigenvalue equation we very much want
NOTE CONF
it not to be the origin.
So if we have the identity yes, the identity sends
NOTE CONF
the origin to the origin.
But the origin is never an eigenvector.
NOTE CONF
So everything is an eigenvector except the origin.
Because we don't care.
NOTE CONF
The origin is never an eigenvector.
It's a technical point.
NOTE CONF
It's one of those technical definitions where you've got to
be a bit careful about what's being excluded.
NOTE CONF
Yes, the origin that equation axe equals lambda x will
always hold for the origin, but the origin is never
NOTE CONF
an eigenvector.
Okay, let's try a second question then.
NOTE CONF
What if we have a line?
Any old line.
NOTE CONF
But this line happens to be two x plus three
y.
NOTE CONF
And again we're thinking about linear transformation.
We're going to reflect in this line what are the
NOTE CONF
potential eigenvalues for this line.
So there are multiple answers here.
NOTE CONF
But what are the potential eigenvalues that we could have
for.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
You can see the answers for um for a reflection
NOTE CONF
in a line.
Again, I'm going to give you 30s to think about
NOTE CONF
it.
You have a line we reflecting in that line.
NOTE CONF
What eigenvalues could we have on my line?
Reflecting in a line.
NOTE CONF
What happens to points on my line?
That's a good thing to think about.
NOTE CONF
What happens to points off my line.
Where do they go?
NOTE CONF
Hopefully I'm giving you movement hints.
Do you have a chat?
NOTE CONF
I know it's lunchtime in week five and everyone's tired,
but yeah.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Oh, let's have another 30s.
NOTE CONF
Oh, we've gone very quiet.
What happens to my line?
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Okay, 10s.
NOTE CONF
Let's see if we can get halfway again.
We need another ten votes.
NOTE CONF
Can I have ten more votes?
And then we'll sit and discuss it a bit.
NOTE CONF
We'll be.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Five.
Four.
NOTE CONF
Three.
Two.
NOTE CONF
One.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So so far we've got that lots of people saying
minus two thirds whereas was why have I got minus
NOTE CONF
two thirds up there whereas minus two thirds come from.
Gradient.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So actually this is the line and we know the
gradient of this line is minus two thirds.
NOTE CONF
So it kind of that that is a number that's
floating around.
NOTE CONF
We've got some people saying one, some people say minus
1Y1.
NOTE CONF
Anyone got an idea what to say Y one is.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So so the eigenvalues for them would be good.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
If we have if we have a vector there then
that's getting mapped to itself.
NOTE CONF
So so that v there is an eigenvector.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um what about minus one.
That seems the second.
NOTE CONF
Another popular one more popular than one, actually.
Wears a vector with minus one.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So here's another vector.
And that one's going to get reflected to there.
NOTE CONF
So there's v and there's minus v.
I've called everything v red v and blue v.
NOTE CONF
Okay good.
So one and minus one seem happy.
NOTE CONF
Uh what about two okay.
Two thirds.
NOTE CONF
Where's the eigenvector for two thirds?
Minus two thirds.
NOTE CONF
Anybody got any ideas?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so what kind of vector here is?
So kind of.
NOTE CONF
Over here.
There.
NOTE CONF
Somewhere.
Um.
NOTE CONF
One way to think about this is we know that
if you're reflecting, then let's just consider vectors through the
NOTE CONF
origin.
Um, that distance from the origin is going to get
NOTE CONF
reflected to something that has the same distance from the
origin.
NOTE CONF
So actually what minus two thirds is going to do
that as an eigenvalue that's going to scale your vector.
NOTE CONF
And none of your vectors are actually changing their size
in a reflection.
NOTE CONF
They're changing their position but they're not changing the size
you are away from, from the line, your perpendicular distance
NOTE CONF
to the line that is a perpendicular projection, which you
should have seen week before last with Andreas.
NOTE CONF
Um, so actually we only have two eigenvalues here.
We have eigenvalue one and we have eigenvalue minus one.
NOTE CONF
And that is true for any reflection in the world.
If you have a matrix and you find out the
NOTE CONF
eigenvalues are only 1 or -1, then that is a
reflection of some sort, um, a straight up reflection, which
NOTE CONF
is quite a helpful thing to know.
So now we're getting to the point where actually we
NOTE CONF
can identify geometrically what a matrix is doing just by
looking at the eigenvalues, which is really helpful in high
NOTE CONF
dimensions, because, I mean, I can just about draw something
in two dimensions.
NOTE CONF
Three dimensions is iffy.
Four dimensions is just wrong.
NOTE CONF
Oh, I can't do four dimensions.
So but I can use this maths.
NOTE CONF
I can use this maths to identify when we've got
a reflection in higher dimensions, which is always useful.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so let's actually think about how we can calculate
eigenvalues.
NOTE CONF
And we have a theorem.
So A is a eigenvalue of our matrix A.
NOTE CONF
Uh if you can't see it that is a good
point.
NOTE CONF
Actually I think I probably wanted to do that, but
I will we'll do that.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So so have we actually come across the term.
The following are equivalent before.
NOTE CONF
This is a proper like maths term that sometimes get
shortened to TFA.
NOTE CONF
You get TFA.
The following are equivalent to theorems where they just write
NOTE CONF
tf a, and then they write a load of statements.
And you have to kind of.
NOTE CONF
I remember the first time I saw that, I was
like, what?
NOTE CONF
What is TFA?
It's the following or equivalent when you see that.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you get a list of statements and you
earn, you have to show them all the same.
NOTE CONF
So you have an eigenvalue.
If lambda of I n minus a is not invertible,
NOTE CONF
which is equivalent to the determinant being zero.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that is a theorem that's really important because
this last bit this determinant is a is called the
NOTE CONF
characteristic polynomial.
And as of last week we all learnt how to
NOTE CONF
calculate determinants.
So that is something we can calculate with relative ease
NOTE CONF
hopefully.
Um particularly in nice cases.
NOTE CONF
Uh, what we are going to do now for bit
though is um, pause slightly before we actually find an
NOTE CONF
eigenvalue and discuss proof, because I'm not sure anyone's actually
discussed proof with you.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So what is a maths proof?
NOTE CONF
Um, the point of maths quite quickly, hopefully you kind
of realise this is we quite quickly build up to
NOTE CONF
stuff that we can't draw pictures of.
That's a bit abstract and that's a bit theoretical and
NOTE CONF
out there.
Um, have people experienced this?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
You go from the calculations and the numbers they're all
NOTE CONF
happy with, and then quite suddenly it's like, here's a
load of letters and stuff you can't touch.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, it's not the same in physics potentially, or chemistry
NOTE CONF
or bits where you can do an actual experiment.
You can't do an experiment in maths and write down
NOTE CONF
what the results are, because you're dealing with stuff that
doesn't exist.
NOTE CONF
Um, physically it exists in our heads.
So we kind of have to have and we build
NOTE CONF
upon it.
It's like I always think of maths as a tower.
NOTE CONF
You learn something and then you learn the next thing,
and then you learn the next thing, and then you
NOTE CONF
learn the next thing.
And quite quickly, your ten floors up and you're literally
NOTE CONF
in the clouds and no one knows what anything is.
Um, but we do that from a very, very small
NOTE CONF
we're building very tall skyscrapers that have a tiny, tiny
footprint.
NOTE CONF
I'm.
This is me just going off at one slightly, but
NOTE CONF
Euclid's Elements, oldest textbook in the world, used for 2000
plus years to teach any maths.
NOTE CONF
You can literally trace the history of maths from the
use of the translations of this textbook.
NOTE CONF
Builds all of geometry from five axioms.
You take five facts, you build 2000 plus years of
NOTE CONF
maths.
Um, which is actually quite scary when you think about
NOTE CONF
it.
So you take five things to be true and you
NOTE CONF
get all of maths, well, all of geometry, lots of
maths for centuries.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So a bit.
NOTE CONF
Scary.
The.
NOTE CONF
Way we do that and we can do that is
because we have very firm foundations and we build our
NOTE CONF
tower very firmly.
And to do that we have to use proof.
NOTE CONF
We have to use proof that is so irrefutable.
No one is going to come and knock our tower
NOTE CONF
down.
No one can come and go.
NOTE CONF
I do not think that bricks laid correctly because you're
like, no, I proved it.
NOTE CONF
That brick has definitely laid correctly.
Um, so that is kind of the point.
NOTE CONF
That is why we are we bang on about proof
all the time because you can't really do anything.
NOTE CONF
You can't go on to the next step unless you
know that your step you've just done is firm and
NOTE CONF
concrete and not going to break on you.
Um, so let's actually try and prove this statement and
NOTE CONF
write it down concretely.
Um, so we're going to start with um, lambda is
NOTE CONF
an eigenvector.
Does anyone have any suggestions for what the first line
NOTE CONF
of this proof should be?
That's not in the thing.
NOTE CONF
Oh, what is the thing?
That was the thing I've zoomed in, that's why.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Anyone got any ideas?
What the first.
NOTE CONF
Where should I start writing this proof?
It's a definition I gave.
NOTE CONF
I'm actually going to do something before I even use
the definition.
NOTE CONF
Does anyone have any?
I need to be really concrete about where I am.
NOTE CONF
So what's the first thing I need to do before
actually, I yeah.
NOTE CONF
Land is not equal to zero, but if I start
writing land in or equal to zero, the first question
NOTE CONF
someone comes along who's trying to, you know, throw away
all of this is what's lambda?
NOTE CONF
So actually we're starting even earlier.
We are starting with the question.
NOTE CONF
Let us define things.
And this is really important.
NOTE CONF
We need somebody has to come along and know what
you're talking about.
NOTE CONF
So we're actually going to start with a we're going
to say let n be an n by n matrix.
NOTE CONF
That's step one.
Let's define what we're actually doing.
NOTE CONF
And then we can and then we can use the
definition of an eigenvalue.
NOTE CONF
So then we can say then lambda is an eigenvalue.
We could even say it's a real number.
NOTE CONF
Lambda is a real number a real number.
We will later come and see.
NOTE CONF
That doesn't always have to be the case.
Um, of a if what's the definition of an eigenvalue.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So if there exists some x again we're defining.
NOTE CONF
This.
Uh, some non-trivial x.
NOTE CONF
Let's not forget that important point.
If they exist some non-trivial x such that axe minus
NOTE CONF
equals lambda x.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I've got up to that statement.
NOTE CONF
Any ideas where I can go from there to show
that lambda times I n minus a is not invertible?
NOTE CONF
Suggestions for the next line?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Let's move everything to one side.
Yeah, I like that one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That equals zero.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's not a vector.
NOTE CONF
Zero.
That's just zero.
NOTE CONF
I take a vector away from this vector, I get
zero.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What next?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
You can write lambda x as lambda.
NOTE CONF
Times the identity matrix times X.
Yeah, exactly.
NOTE CONF
Um, so why why do I.
What's the next step?
NOTE CONF
Why is that important?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Factorise.
So I'm going to factorise.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So why is it important that I wrote, um, this
identity before I factorised.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Otherwise, I'd be saying a matrix minus a number times
NOTE CONF
x, which doesn't make sense.
So I need a matrix minus a matrix.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I need that that identity matrix there to
make my lambda a matrix and not just a number.
NOTE CONF
I can't take away a number from a matrix.
So that's another important thing we need to kind of
NOTE CONF
bear in mind what are the elements we're talking about.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I've got to that point.
Um, why I'm now going to say I can therefore
NOTE CONF
write.
Therefore a minus lambda x is not invertible.
NOTE CONF
Why if it's invertible, then it's, uh it's.
Yeah, exactly.
NOTE CONF
So we can say as x is a non-trivial solution
to a homogeneous system.
NOTE CONF
Um, then by uh, I looked this up, theorem 2.4.5,
in the book, 2.4.5.
NOTE CONF
The inverse theorem.
Um.
NOTE CONF
We know.
I could write that.
NOTE CONF
I could times everything by minus one.
Let's times everything by minus one.
NOTE CONF
Uh, is not invertible.
Okay, good.
NOTE CONF
Everyone happy so far?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, what about next?
What are, um.
NOTE CONF
What's the last line?
The determinant equals zero.
NOTE CONF
They're the same thing.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So I could say, um, it's actually it's actually a
theorem.
NOTE CONF
So it's another term.
So I could say by theorem 3.2.2 uh non invertible
NOTE CONF
matrices.
Have determinant equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
And then we're done.
NOTE CONF
So I draw a little square box or I like
QED or something.
NOTE CONF
Um, to say it's the end of my proof, but
that's all you need to prove that statement.
NOTE CONF
That's quite a big statement.
Um, and that's a kind of textbook proof.
NOTE CONF
That's exactly what you need to write to formally prove
that statement.
NOTE CONF
You don't need loads and loads of stuff, but you
do need to define your objects, justify every step.
NOTE CONF
Um, and kind of explain why each line follows from
the previous one.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to go into lots of little bits
of depth.
NOTE CONF
You don't need to go.
I can subtract two things.
NOTE CONF
Um, but you do need to bear in mind, particularly
in this step, what our objects are.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Are we happy?
NOTE CONF
Good.
Was that helpful?
NOTE CONF
To see what a proof was?
How do I to prove I don't?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
We kind of expected you to write proofs without telling
NOTE CONF
you what a proof was, which was maybe a bit
interesting.
NOTE CONF
Okay, we have five more minutes, so.
Let us have a quick go using this this thing.
NOTE CONF
So we want to find the determinant of a matrix,
uh, to find the eigenvalues.
NOTE CONF
So what are the easiest matrices.
We can find the determinants for two by two.
NOTE CONF
What about general n by n diagonal.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Let's actually go up a triangular because I can someone
yell numbers at me.
NOTE CONF
1335992.
Any one more.
NOTE CONF
42.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Why not?
Okay, so there is a matrix.
NOTE CONF
Let us find the eigenvalues of that matrix.
So we want to consider the matrix a lambda I
NOTE CONF
n minus a one point I will actually make which
kind of highlights in this proof.
NOTE CONF
Lots of people.
So the textbook and lots of people talk about lambda
NOTE CONF
I n minus a other people talk about a minus
lambda in these are equivalent when we're finding eigenvalues because
NOTE CONF
we're making it the determinant equals zero.
It doesn't matter.
NOTE CONF
Um this one's nicer for the polynomial.
You're going to get out.
NOTE CONF
This one's nicer.
From a calculation point of view they are entirely equivalent.
NOTE CONF
Some textbooks go one way, some go the other.
Do not worry which way you go.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay, so we have lambda I n minus a.
NOTE CONF
What's this matrix going to be if this is the
matrix A.
NOTE CONF
What's this term going to be.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
What's the next term.
Three.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Yep.
NOTE CONF
No.
Lambda minus nine.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Two.
NOTE CONF
Yeah zero.
What's the last 42.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And what's the determined to that matrix.
NOTE CONF
Which is now the same as.
And yes, that is very true.
NOTE CONF
Good point.
Don't trust.
NOTE CONF
Me with negative.
Signs.
NOTE CONF
Don't trust anyone with negative signs.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, what's the determinant of this matrix?
NOTE CONF
Lambda.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Nice.
Perfect.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
And so if we want that to be zero.
NOTE CONF
So what are the eigenvalues of our completely made up
matrix.
NOTE CONF
One nine and 42.
Perfect.
NOTE CONF
Look, we just found some eigenvalues.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
That was nice and easy.
It is nice and easy with a diagonal or triangular
NOTE CONF
matrix.
Um, even one that's completely made up on the spot
NOTE CONF
that so eigenvalues aren't too bad to calculate.
Even if we had not an upper triangular matrix.
NOTE CONF
You're still going to just end up with with a
polynomial that you can solve most of the time.
NOTE CONF
Um.
We know that polynomials have roots and we can find
NOTE CONF
those roots.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Um, do we have any questions?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
One last question then.
Um, which is more about tomorrow's lecture, actually.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's go for that one.
What?
NOTE CONF
Um.
What?
NOTE CONF
So, so tomorrow we are going to talk about finding
eigenvectors and diagonalising.
NOTE CONF
And we probably will have a bit of time at
the end.
NOTE CONF
Is there anything that you particularly want to spend more
time on, anything from today or anything from this week
NOTE CONF
reading that you want to spend a bit more time
on eigenvectors?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
We will discuss eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
Um, good.
Um, and then we will think about next week's, uh,
NOTE CONF
tomorrow's lecture.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It is 3:00, 1:00, not 3:00, 1:00.
NOTE CONF
Um, there is now a one way system in this
lecture.
NOTE CONF
Apparently, they've unblocked this door, so I'm supposed to encourage
you to leave via this door here as opposed to
NOTE CONF
the door?
The back, so people can come in.
NOTE CONF
Thank you for coming.
I will see you next week, you know, tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
I'll see you tomorrow.
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF